Playground
==========

The ``playground/`` directory in the kiln repository is a runnable
multi-app FastAPI project that demonstrates kiln's project mode.  It
generates a blog API and an inventory API from Jsonnet configs, mounts
them both under ``/v1/``, and serves them with uvicorn.

It is the fastest way to see kiln end-to-end without setting up your
own project.

Structure
---------

.. code-block:: text

   playground/
   ├── examples/
   │   ├── project.jsonnet   # top-level project config
   │   ├── blog.jsonnet      # blog app config
   │   └── inventory.jsonnet # inventory app config
   ├── blog/
   │   └── models/           # hand-written SQLAlchemy models
   ├── inventory/
   │   └── models.py         # hand-written SQLAlchemy models
   ├── db/
   │   └── base.py           # shared PGCraftBase
   ├── alembic/              # Alembic migration env
   ├── _generated/           # written by kiln generate (git-ignored)
   ├── main.py               # FastAPI entry point
   └── justfile              # convenience recipes

``_generated/`` is the output directory.  Everything inside it is
overwritten on every ``kiln generate`` run and should not be edited
by hand.

The ``blog/`` and ``inventory/`` directories contain hand-written code
that coexists with the generated ``_generated/blog/`` and
``_generated/inventory/`` packages via Python
`namespace packages <https://peps.python.org/pep-0420/>`_ — no
``__init__.py`` in blog/ or inventory/, both parent directories on
``sys.path``.

Quick start
-----------

From the repo root, install all dependency groups::

    uv sync --all-groups

Then from ``playground/``::

    just g    # generate from examples/project.jsonnet
    just s    # start uvicorn with --reload

Or in one step::

    just f    # generate then serve

The server starts at ``http://localhost:8000``.  Interactive docs are
at ``http://localhost:8000/docs``.

Justfile recipes
----------------

All recipes are run from the ``playground/`` directory.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 10 70

   * - Recipe
     - Alias
     - Description
   * - ``just generate``
     - ``just g``
     - Run ``kiln generate`` against ``examples/project.jsonnet``.
   * - ``just serve``
     - ``just s``
     - Start uvicorn with hot-reload.
   * - ``just fresh``
     - ``just f``
     - Generate then serve.
   * - ``just migrate``
     -
     - Apply all pending Alembic migrations.
   * - ``just migration``
     -
     - Generate a new autogenerated migration revision.

Project config
--------------

``examples/project.jsonnet`` is a **project-level** config — it declares
shared auth and databases, then lists each app with its URL prefix:

.. code-block:: jsonnet

   local auth = import "kiln/auth/jwt.libsonnet";
   local db   = import "kiln/db/databases.libsonnet";

   {
     auth: auth.jwt({ secret_env: "JWT_SECRET" }),

     databases: [
       db.postgres("primary", { default: true }),
       db.postgres("analytics", { url_env: "ANALYTICS_DATABASE_URL" }),
     ],

     apps: [
       { config: import "blog.jsonnet",      prefix: "/blog"      },
       { config: import "inventory.jsonnet", prefix: "/inventory" },
     ],
   }

Each app config (``blog.jsonnet``, ``inventory.jsonnet``) is a
self-contained kiln config with its own ``module``, ``resources``.
Kiln merges the project-level ``auth`` and ``databases``
into each app config before generating, so app configs do not need to
redeclare them.

Apps
----

**blog** (``module: "blog"``)
    Demonstrates plain ``read_only`` and ``full`` presets alongside a
    custom CRUD resource.  The ``Author`` model is read-only;
    ``Article`` has full CRUD with per-operation auth and two actions;
    ``Tag`` uses the ``full`` preset with an integer PK and no auth.

**inventory** (``module: "inventory"``)
    Demonstrates the full range of resource patterns:

    * ``Product`` — full CRUD with a custom ``route_prefix``, explicit
      field lists, per-operation auth, and two actions (one with params
      and auth, one with no params and no auth).
    * ``StockMovement`` — create-only (append-only) record with a
      ``date`` field.
    * ``EventLog`` — the ``write_only`` preset (create/update/delete,
      no reads) backed by a ``PGCraftAppendOnly`` model on the
      analytics database.  Exercises ``db_key``, ``route_prefix``,
      ``email``/``json``/``datetime`` field types, ``require_auth: true``
      (all operations), and a no-param no-auth action.

EventLog and PGCraftAppendOnly
------------------------------

``inventory/models.py`` defines ``EventLog`` using
``__pgcraft__ = {"factory": PGCraftAppendOnly}``.  This instructs
pgcraft to create an SCD Type 2 structure: a root table (for the
stable ``id``/``created_at`` identity) and an attributes table (for
mutable columns), joined through an ``event_logs`` view backed by
INSTEAD OF triggers.  Each write appends a new attributes row,
preserving the full change history.

.. code-block:: python

   class EventLog(Base):
       __tablename__ = "event_logs"
       __table_args__ = {"schema": "public"}
       __pgcraft__ = {"factory": PGCraftAppendOnly}

       # Raw Column instances required — pgcraft's plugin pipeline
       # collects columns from the class dict before ORM mapping.
       event_type  = Column(String(80), nullable=False)
       actor_email = Column(String(254), nullable=False)
       payload     = Column(Text, nullable=True)

Kiln exposes it as a ``write_only`` resource on the ``analytics``
database, so all mutations go to the secondary pool while reads
remain absent from the API entirely.
